ASST1 design document

Part 1 This scenario involved multiple threads accessing the same
counter variable. The problem arises as threads will read the counter
variable and then test this copy against a condition. This meant that
the value of the variable could have been modified by another thread,
and the comparison will be made using the wrong values.

The solution to this was to defined a critical section using a lock,
around the parts of the code where the counter was to be modified. This
means the counter will only be read and written to by one thread at
a time. The lock is acquired before the condition is tested, and is
released inside both branches of the if statement. This is done so that
the critical section can be as small as possible, as we do not want the
lock to be held after counter access if finished.

Part 2 This scenario required a shared buffer to be implemented where
producers pushed items and consumers popped items. This buffer was
a shared resource, and any access to this had to be in a critical
section. This was solves through use of locks, and condition variable
were useful in order to handle the buffer full and empty states.

When full, the producer would wait, releasing the lock until signalled by
a consumer popping an item of the buffer. When empty, the consumer would
wait until signalled by a producer pushing an item into the buffer. This
was done through the use of condition variables.

Part 3 This scenario was similar to the producer consumer problem in
the need for a buffer. In this case the customers pushed on orders as
producers and staff popped them off as consumers. So the buffer was the
first critical section, and this was handled as in part 2.

For this scenario, we introduced a data structure called the
order_form. This contains the can of paint, allowing the the order
status. The status is a semaphore, and this is used to indicate to the
customer that their order is complete and they can go home. Essentially
the customer waits until the staff member signals them the order
is complete and they can leave. When the last customer leaves, they
broadcast to the staff members waiting on an empty order queue using a
condition variable, telling them they can leave the store as well.

When staff members take orders, they are essentially popping off
the buffer, as outlined above. They will do this given that not all
customers have left and the queue is not empty. If empty, they wait
using a condition variable until customers signal a new order, or the
last customer makes the broadcast to get out of the queue. If there
are no more customers, then they release their lock on the order queue,
and return NULL, indicating they too should leave.

The actual filling of order was the interesting part of this scenario. The
paint tint array was a shared resource, and more specifically we needed
each tint to be a separate shared resource. This meant we needed to define
critical sections around the array only when gaining access to tints,
and then a critical section around the specific tints being used. This
was achieved in the following way.

A lock on the tint array would first be acquired. The staff member
would then wait until all the tints the order needs are available
(i.e. their locks have not been acquired). Until that time, they
would release the lock on the array using a condition variable called
cv_tints_unavailable. Waiting until all the tints are available to
proceed prevents deadlock.

Once the required tints are found to be available, a lock is acquired
on each of the required tints, and then the lock on the tint array is
released. When we are acquiring locks on the tints, we use lock_do_i_hold
to ensure we are not trying to acquire multiple locks on a tint which
is requested more than once. We update a separate availablity array with
0’s and 1’s, indicating whether a tint is available or not.

The staff member then mixes the can, knowing that they have exclusive
access to the tints they need. Once finished, the release the locks on
the tints, again ensuring not to release the same lock more than once,
and update the same availability array to indicate the tints is now
available. The staff member then broadcasts using the condition variable
for staff members waiting on unavailable tints, telling them new tints
are now available. As mentioned above, the staff member serves the order,
indicating to the customer by signalling the semaphore.

